The following content is provided under
a Creative Common License. Your support
will help MIT Open Courseware continue
to offer high-quality educational
resources for free. To make a donation
or view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open
Courseware at ocw.mmit.edu.
Last week we talked about the key
components of a proof. Propositions,
axioms, and logical deductions. And as
you probably talked about during
recitation,
we're not going to worry too much about
what axioms or logical deductions that
you use. Anything that is reasonable is
fine by us. We're not going to ask you
to know what modus ponins is or to label
some law when you make a logical
deduction. Just, you know, be
reasonable. any fact you knew coming
into this course about mathematics
probably close enough to use as an
axiom. You want to make sure your axioms
are consistent. Uh but that's okay. Now
the exception to this would be is say
we're on an exam and we ask you to prove
some proposition P. Well, you can't say
I already knew P. It's an axiom check.
That's not so good. We're asking you to
prove it from some more elementary
facts.
Okay. It's also you don't want to be
making wild leaps of faith or saying
it's obvious that unless it really is
obvious. That kind of stuff can get you
in trouble. Much better to sort of
explain the reasoning in the proof.
Now, the proofs that we covered last
week in recitation and the problem set
were all examples of what are called
direct proofs. You start with some
axioms. You have some theorems you knew
before or you proved along the way and
you make logical deductions until you
get to where you want to go. The theorem
We're going to start today with an
indirect proof. For example, a proof by
contradiction. And this is a little bit
different. In a proof by contradiction,
you assume the opposite of what you're
trying to prove.
Then you just take steps forward,
logical deductions forward until you
arrive at a contradiction. Something
where you prove false equals true.
Now, if you can ever get to the point
where you prove something is false
that's and true, that means what you
assumed at the start had to be wrong.
Namely, the that what you're trying to
prove has to be true. So, let's let's
write that down because it can be a
little confusing the first time.
So to prove
a proposition P is true,
you will assume
that it's false.
In other words, that not P is true.
And then
you use that hypothesis.
Namely, that P is false
to derive
a falsehood. In other words, you prove a
falsehood is true. And this is called
deriving a contradiction.
And so it must be that in fact P is not
false. Namely that it's true.
Now this works because if you can prove
if not P
implies false is true.
Well, from last time,
the only way this is a true statement
is if this is false, namely P is true.
All right, so we can conclude that P is
true if we can show that not P implies a
falsehood.
Any questions about that? It's sort of a
lot of sort of notation and if you until
you've seen it, it can be confusing.
So maybe we should do do an example.
Let's prove
that square<unk> of two is irrational.
Is irrational.
Okay, everybody knows what an irrational
number is.
That's something that can't be expressed
as the ratio of integers.
Okay. And probably most people already
know that. How many people have not seen
a proof that square root of two is
irrational before?
All right. So, most of you have seen a
proof of that. Good. You know, if you
try to do a direct proof of this, it's
pretty hard. How do you show there's no
way to represent the square root of two
as as integers a over b. But it's very
easy if we do a proof by contradiction.
Now, when you're doing a proof by
contradiction, always start off by
saying
by contradiction. Write that down.
And then what you do next is you say,
I'm going to assume
for the purpose of contradiction
that
not P that P is false. when not P is
true. In this case that would be<unk> of
two is rational.
So in this case,
here's what we're trying to prove.
That's P.
I'm going to assume not P, namely that
square root of two is a rational number.
Then I'm going to get a contradiction or
a falsehood. And then I'm going to know
that P was true after all.
All right. So let's see where this leads
us.
Well, if two is rational, then we can
express it as a over b, where a over b
is a fraction in lowest terms.
That means a and b have no common
divisor.
And then I can square both sides
and I get 2 is a^2 over b^2.
Then I multiply by b^2 and I get 2 b^2 =
a^2.
And what does that imply about a?
What can you tell me about a if it
equals a square is 2 b^2?
Anything special about a? Can it be can
a be anything?
A squ is even right because 2 B square
is an even number. So A squ is even. And
what does that mean about A?
A is even. A square is even then A is
even.
So A is even.
All right. So we can write that as two
divides a. That's the divide symbol.
You'll see a lot of that next week.
All right. If a is even, what do I know
about a squared? I know more than just
it's even.
What is it? It's a multiple of
four. Yeah. So that means that four
divides a 2. A^2 is 2 b^ 2. So that
means that 4 divides 2 b ^ 2. Divide
each side by two means 2 divides b^ 2.
What does that imply about b?
B is even.
All right, B is even. Good.
Well, I've got A is even and B is even.
I got a contradiction here somewhere.
Yeah, A over B was not a fraction in
lowest terms because both A and B are
even.
All right. So that implies
a over b is not
in lowest terms
and that
gives a contradiction.
Now you'll see that written lots of
ways. One is you can say a
contradiction. Sometimes you'll see just
this sharp symbol written and that means
you got to a contradiction because here
we had it being in lowest terms and here
we have it not in lowest terms. You
can't have both at the same time. So you
got a contradiction
and that means we've now proved that
this assumption was wrong. Square root
of two is not irrational is not
rational. So it must be irrational.
All right. And then we put a little box
here at the end or sometimes you'll see
a check. Sometimes you'll see QED that
says the proof's done now.
It's over. Any questions
about that proof? We're going to do a
lot of proofs by contradiction. Uh
actually there's an interesting story
behind this proof. As far as we know, it
was first discovered by the Pythagoreans
way back when in ancient Greece. And the
Pythagoreans were a religious society
started by Pythagoras of Pythagoras
theorem fame. Now, it sounds weird
today, but back then in ancient Greece,
math was a religion. All right? Every
once in a while, you'll see somebody
around MIT and you'll think, "Ah, he
must think math is a religion." Uh, but
back then, it really was. And it was
ruled by gods because this is ancient
Greece. And there were two key gods in
this religion, Apiron and Peros. Now,
Aperon was the bad god and he was the
god of infinity because infinity was
considered all that was bad. And if I
don't think we'll do a lot with infinity
this term, but if we do, you'll
appreciate why that's the case. And uh
Peros was the good god. He was the god
of the finite world and represented
everything that was good to the ancient
Greeks.
Now, one of their main axioms or beliefs
was that there were no irrational
numbers. They just didn't exist.
Now, the reason is they didn't like
irrational numbers. They were bad
because, well, they're infinite. You
can't write them as a decimal without
repeating forever. You know, just an
infinite sort of decimal representation.
They liked rational numbers, you know,
like 17th. That's a good number because
you can write it as 0.14
repeating.
So rational numbers are finite in that
you can always find the repeating
pattern of finite length. Irrational
numbers are not. They're infinite in
that sense of the the ancient Greeks. So
they said there were no irrational
numbers. That was an early axiom.
Now they also had an axiom that said
that every
length of a line was finite therefore
rational. Right? You know the ancient
Greeks were good with the uh compass and
drawing lines and straight edges and
stuff. So they said any line that you
can construct has a finite length to it.
So therefore it has a rational length.
That was axiom number two.
Now they were good geometers. So they
knew of course they they developed the
Pythagorean theorem that if you took a
triangle and you had side lengths one
the length of the hypotenuse was
hypotenuse was <unk>2.
Therefore they had a theorem that said
<unk>2 was rational because you got the
two axims there. Right?
Now eventually they discovered a proof
like that that it wasn't rational. It
was irrational. Now this caused quite a
stir. First, it meant that their axioms
were inconsistent. Every theorem they'd
proved was now suspect.
Why don't you have inconsistent axioms?
Even worse, the devil is in their midst.
Square root two is infinite is the bad
god. And this is the most basic length
they had besides one. All right? So,
that's a very bad thing. Sort of like,
you know, today we were to wake up and
discover that, you know, there were only
nine commandments and the tenth was
planted there by the devil and you're
not sure which one maybe, you know, that
would be a big mess sacrilege.
Well, so what were they to do? This is a
disaster of major proportions. So they
covered it up and they denied the
result. So they didn't want to publish
that proof. So they kept on saying
square root two was rational.
But then according to legend there was a
deep throat somebody who let out the
word and the proof that square root two
was irrational because that would be
very destabilizing for the society and
so they killed him. Uh this is the
legend. Uh now hard to imagine getting
killed over the irrationality of two but
uh all right we're going to do a lot
more of of these kind of proofs in
homework and and throughout the term.
The next proof I want to show you is uh
one of my favorite proof techniques. one
of my favorite proofs and that is a
false proof. And we're gonna see a lot
of these during the term too. And if we
could bring the screens down.
Somebody back there to Yeah. Great.
Bring the screens down. I'm going to and
then turn this on for me. So I'm going
to prove to you that 90 is bigger than
92.
All right. And that hopefully is not
really true. Um but you know, watch this
proof and see if uh you see any problems
with it. All
right, the proof by PowerPoint. Right
away, you should be suspicious.
I'm going to take two triangles with
total area 90 and put them together and
then divide them up into four triangles
with area greater than 92.
And by the conservation of area axiom,
which you want to be maybe thinking
about, this will imply an area of 90 is
larger than area of 92. and therefore
that 90 is bigger than 92.
All right, those are my triangles. They
are right triangles 9 by 10.
If I put them together, I get a 9 by10
rectangle.
Of course, it has area 90. 9 * 10.
Now I'm going to slide these triangles
across their u uh diagonal so that I get
instead of having 10 on the side I'm
going to slide it so I get a two and an
eight. Okay, I had 10 there before now
it's two and eight. And then you see
I've got this I can cut off along the
dotted line and as you can see that
dotted line we haven't won't comput it
exactly but it's a little bit bigger
than two right it's a little bit longer
than that two there you could see that.
All right. So, I'll call it two plus
bigger than two. Now, I slice off along
the dotted line.
And now I'm going to put those two
triangles together. And I create a
rectangle
2 by two little more than two. Now, the
area of the little rectangle is bigger
than four because I got two * something
bigger than two. And you can see here I
have the eight left over and I have 9 +
2 plus means it's a little bit bigger
than 11 by 8. I got area bigger than 88.
add them up, I got area bigger than 92.
So, I started with 90 and I created more
than 92.
All right. What's the problem here?
I mean, this would be good if I could do
it. I'd get some gold, you know, bars of
gold and, you know, cut them up and do
the game and I'd make more gold. That
would be pretty good if I could do that.
Is it the conservation of area axiom?
Did I assume something there that was
too powerful? That if I manipulate the
area of rectangles like this that the
area needs to be the same?
Yeah.
My bigger ones aren't closed. Well,
let's see. I don't know. Let's go back
and see how I made those bigger ones.
All right. I got my triangles, right?
I'm just chopping along the line there.
And I got two plus and nine.
That's Those are rectangles.
They look like rectangles.
Yeah. Uh yeah.
Well, it looks bigger than two,
doesn't it?
Yeah. Two plus is Well, two bigger than
two is bigger than two, but yeah, maybe
that should have been a two minus. Would
that change anything?
Yeah. If if that had been a 2 minus,
then we'd have area less than four, area
less than 88, and then 90 would be less
than 92. That would be okay. But it sure
as heck looks bigger than the two plus
looks bigger than the two, doesn't it? I
don't know. Do they got distortion out
there?
I guarantee you if I measured on my
screen, that two plus is bigger than the
length of the two.
I guarantee you we can we can take we
can take a a ruler on my screen and the
two plus will be longer on the ruler
than the two that I guarantee you. But
you're on the right track.
Yeah,
that is really 1.8.
Good.
All right. Now, how did you But I but it
is true. If I measured on my screen,
it's bigger. Yeah.
So So are are the triangles like drawn
to scale? It's like on SAT they always
say not to scale, right?
Yeah. Yeah. They're not drawn to scale.
In fact, if I go back to the beginning,
it says 9 by 10.
But in fact, if I measure the nine, it's
bigger than the 10.
All right?
So, this is one of the big problems of
proofs by picture because looking at it,
you're not thinking which is bigger,
nine or 10 up there. You the 10's bigger
even though it's not. It's shorter. But
when you get down into the proof, well,
clearly the two plus was bigger than the
two because it looks that way. It is on
the paper. All right. In fact, you go
computer, you're probably right. It's
1.8, not 2 plus. But that's how the
error crept in and how it was drawn and
then you're going along with the proof
and everything else is just fine. So,
the mistake is right up front. I drew it
wrong. Okay. Uh, and this happens. You
do graph, we'll talk about graph in a
couple weeks. Over and over again,
people do this. They draw it looks like
this. You accept that and then you're
dead. Everything else there's no hope.
Every everybody clear what went wrong in
this picture? How we got off track? This
is sort of a nasty one.
Okay. Um,
now one of the nice things about proofs
is that when there is a bug, if you
really write it out step by step and
there's a bug, you can go back and find
it. Uh, and so this I didn't sort of
really write it out very well step by
step and it was harder harder to find
now. All right, so if we can pull the
screens up.
Thanks.
Okay, so for the rest of today and the
rest of this week, we're going to talk
about a different kind of proof
technique, which is induction.
Now, induction is by far the most
powerful and commonly used proof
technique in computer science. If
there's one thing that you should know
by the time you're done with this class,
it's how to do a proof by induction. In
fact, if there's one thing you will know
by the time we're done with this class
is how to do a proof by induction. And
in some sense, when we get to grading
the final, how we measure ourselves as
instructors, the first test is, can you
do the proof byinduction question and do
a good proof there? You will see it on
the midterm and the final, probably in
multiple instances.
Now, just to make sure you become
intimately familiar with induction,
we're going to do over a dozen proofs
with induction in class and and many
more in homework over the next five to
six weeks.
You'll probably be dreaming about
induction if we're successful here uh
soon. The good news is that induction is
very easy once you get your mind around
it and get some practice. It it really
is not a hard thing. Uh in fact,
induction is really just an axiom.
So let me state it.
Let PN
be a predicate
if P of zero is true.
and
for all natural numbers n
P of N implies P of N + one
is true.
So here I'm saying that this is true for
all N.
Okay.
Then
for all n
natural numbers
p of n is true.
All right. Another way of saying this
without the for alls there is that if
P 0 is true, if P 0 implies P1 is true,
if P2 sorry P1 implies P2 is true and so
on forever
then P of N is true for all N. So then
P 0,
P1,
P2
forever are true.
Okay,
now you can sort of see why this is a
reasonable axiom
because if P 0 is true and P 0 implies
P1 then by that modus ponus thing or one
of the logical deductions we know P1 is
true
and if P1 is true and P1 implies P2 is
true then we know by the same reasoning
P2 is
and so on forever. Now the reason it
becomes an axiom is that and so on
forever part of it. That's why we need
it as an axiom.
Uh you can sort of view this as a series
of dominoes.
You know, I got a domino for each N.
And each domino knocks over the next in
terms of truth. Knocking over
corresponds to truth here. And if I know
P 0 is true, that means I knock over P
0. P 0 implies P1 means P1 goes down. P1
implies P2 means P2 goes down, and so
forth. All right. Pretty pretty basic.
Um, raise your hand if you think you
don't have a lot of experience with
induction.
All right. Yeah, that's yeah, that's
pretty pretty typical. About a third to
a half of you. So, we're gonna we're
going to change that. Um, let's do a
simple proof using induction.
So let's prove that for all n bigger
than or equal to zero again natural
numbers that 1 + 2 + 3
+ n equals n * n + one over two.
This is actually a useful thing to
remember. We're going to use this all
term this identity.
Now the first thing before we prove it I
want to make sure we understand this
this dot dot dot notation because it is
the source of a lot of errors. What it
means is that you need to fill in the
pattern here
which is vague.
What it means in this case is you fill
in four five six all the way up to n
minus one and then n. That's what it
means. Figure out the pattern and fill
it in. Pretty risky thing. Uh now in
this case because that's so vague
there's other terminology we use for
this. For example we would use
a big sigma capital sigma i = 0 to n of
i. That means the sum of i where i is
the integers from 0 to n inclusive.
Actually let me put one here.
Okay.
Another way to write this,
these are all equivalent ways to write
it, is you could put one less than equal
to I less than equal to N of I. So you
could put summing I over the range from
1 to N or you could write it on the
bottom if you want.
So these are four different ways of
writing the same thing, the sum of the
natural numbers from one to n. And we'll
use them all during the term.
All right. Now, there's some special
cases that make this a little more
interesting. What if n equals 1?
I've got 1 + 2 plus dot dot dot plus n.
What do you suppose it equals if n
equals 1?
One. Because we're summing the numbers
from one to one. That's just one, the
number one. There is no two.
And there aren't two copies of one. So
this notation is very ambiguous. You see
a two here in the sum. If n is one, you
see a one here and a one here. Right? So
you got to be careful. I guarantee you
you'll make a mistake with this. In
fact, I'm going to show you another
false proof later where this comes into
play. Um, what about if n is less than
equal to zero?
What is it then?
Any thoughts?
Zero. There are no integers to sum.
No one, no two, no n because you never
get started because you're sorry. N is
less equal to zero because you're
summing from one to zero. Zero's below.
You never doesn't include anything. So
these are the conventions to keep in
mind um with the edge cases here. All
right, it's easy enough to check that
the theorem is true for certain values
of n. For example, n= 4. I've got 1 + 2
+ 3 + 4. That's 10. And 10= 4 * 5 / 2
plugging in the formula. So for any
value of n, you could check this formula
is true. proving it's true for all n you
know is a takes a little more effort
unless you use induction. So let's let's
do that.
So prove the theorem. Now whenever
you're using a proof by induction first
thing you do is you write down by
induction.
So we know what you're going to do.
And the first thing you next thing you
need to do is figure out what's your
predicate.
What's your your inductive hypothesis?
What's P?
All right. So, usually P will be the
thing you're trying to prove, namely
that 1 plus 2 plus 3 up to N is N * N +
1 over two. And you you state that you
say let P of N
be the proposition
the predicate that
the sum I = 1 to N of I equals N * N + 1
/2.
All right. All right. And once you've
got that established, now we're going to
go verify
that P 0 is true and that P uh N implies
PN plus one.
All right. So always have to write this
down. The next thing to do is to check
what's called the base case P 0. So
let's do that.
All right. So we write down base case.
Some people call it the basis step
and we have to check that P 0 is true.
Well, what's the sum of i = 1 to 0 of i
zero? There are no terms in this sum.
And if I look over there, n * n + 1 /2,
if n is zero,
it equals zero.
So, we're done with the base case. We've
now proved that p 0 is true.
And the second part is called the
inductive step.
And here we have to show for n greater
than equal to zero we need to show that
pn implies pn plus one is true.
Now, how do we show an implication is
true?
How do I show this is true? What am I
going to do to show that's true in
general? Yeah,
right. Because an implication is true in
every case except for true implies
false. So if if PN is false, we're done.
This implication is true. The only case
we have to worry about is P of N is
true. So we assume P of N is true. And
now we confirm that that means PN plus
one is true.
All right.
So we write that down. Assume
PN is true.
And you might also write down for
purposes of induction
or purposes of it verifying the
inductive hypothesis
just to let us know why you're assuming
it. In other words, you're not assuming
PN is true for purposes of
contradiction.
You're assuming it for purposes of
induction.
All right, let's do that. So
all right that means in this case
i.e we assume
1 + 2 plus up to n equals
n * n + 1 / 2.
And we need to show
that the n+1 case is true. Namely 1 + 2
+
n + 1
equ=
n +1 * n + 2
/ 2.
All right. You know, it's sort of weird
and this does confuse people that aren't
familiar to you yet familiar with
induction. It looks like we just assumed
what we're trying to prove.
We're trying to prove this is true for
all n and we just assumed it, but we're
assuming it in the context of
establishing
this implication is true. And then we
apply the induction axiom to conclude PN
is true for all n.
All right.
Well, let's rewrite this as 1 + 2 +
n + n + 1.
Because I've assumed PN, I can rewrite
this
as n +1 / 2.
And now
plus n plus one out here.
That equals
well I got n^2
+ n here over 2
+ 2 n + 2.
All right. And that equals
n +1 * n +2 over two which is what we're
trying to show.
So we've completed now the inductive
step. We have shown that for all n PN
implies PN plus one for all n bigger
than equal to zero.
Any questions
about that? So the proof is done.
We've done everything we need to imply
induction. We got P 0 is true and PN
implies PN plus one for all n bigger
than equal to zero.
Now
induction helped us prove theorem.
Did it help us understand why theorem is
true?
Do you have any feel for why the theorem
is true after seeing the proof?
Not really.
No, I don't think you know sometimes
induction will give you an
understanding, sometimes it won't. Here
you got no understanding of why the
theorem is true, which is sort of
unfortunate.
Did induction help you figure out
the answer to the sum? Namely, say you
were trying to derive this answer from
this sum. Did induction give you the
answer?
No. You had to know the answer, namely
this, in order to prove it was true.
Now later we'll see examples where
induction actually can give you the
answer. But often it does not. Often
induction gives you no hints, no answer,
just proves that it's right once you had
the clever idea that oh maybe that's the
answer.
All right, you'll see that with things
like the beaver flu problem. All right,
that you know figuring out the inductive
hypothesis or the answer you know the
details of it is hard but once you do it
then applying the induction not so hard
but it gives you a concrete proof.
Okay, let's do another one.
Fact we're just going to spend the rest
of today doing induction proofs. up.
Okay. So
for all natural numbers n
3 divides n cubed minus n means n cub -
n is a multiple of three. For example, n
is five.
3 divides 125 - 5
because it's 120.
Let's prove that.
And we're going to use induction.
What do you suppose PN's going to be?
What's my predicate or my inductive
hypothesis here?
Any thoughts?
Yeah.
Yeah, that's you. Go ahead.
Yeah. First thing you always want to try
is you assume that as your induction
hypothesis.
So we say let PN
be 3ides
n cub minus n.
What's the next thing we do in our
proof?
Base case.
always easy to forget but not a good
idea.
Base case is n equals 0 and sure enough
3 divides 0 - 0. So that's done.
What's the next step we do?
What is it next step?
inductive step
and for that we're going to need to show
for n bigger than equal to zero we want
to show PN implies PN + one is true.
So to do that we assume PN is true.
In other words, we assume
that 3 divides n cubus n. And we're
trying to show that it 3 divides n + 1
cub - n + 1. So we we take a look at we
examine
n +1 cubed minus n +1 and we want to
show it's a multiple of three.
Well, let's expand that out.
This is n cub + 3 n 2 + 3 n + 1 and I
subtract off n + 1.
So I get n cub + 3 n^2
+ 2 n.
Is this a multiple of three?
I need to show that's a multiple of
three and then I'd be all done.
Is it a multiple of three?
Beats me.
It doesn't look like a multiple of three
necessarily.
So maybe we need to massage it a little
bit. I I do know that this is a multiple
of three. I can use that fact. And in
proofs by induction, you always want to
if you're not making use of that fact,
then you're not really making use of
induction. Sort of a warning sign. So I
want to use this fact to prove this.
Well,
let's do a get a minus n in here.
This equals nub - n + 3 n^2 plus well if
I subtracted an n I got to add an n + 3
n.
So I've rewritten it now. Is it clear?
Now it's clear. Very simple because
three divides this by pn. Three divides
that and three divides that. So this is
a multiple of three.
All right. because I've got 3 divides 3
n^ 2 3 divides 3 n and 3 divides n cub
minus n by
pn or you could say by the inductive
hypothesis
pn is the inductive hypothesis another
name for it so therefore three divides
that which means three divides this
so that means three divides n + 1 cubed
- n + one and we are done
with the proof by induction.
Any questions about that one?
So the key steps in induction are always
the same. You write down proof by
induction. You identify your predicate.
You do the base case. Usually that
equals zero, but it could be something
else. And then you do your inductive
step.
Now in general you could start your
induction don't start it at zero you
could start it at some value B some
integer B.
Let's take a look at that.
So you could have for the base case
you could have P of B is true not P of
zero.
And then for your induction step
you would have for all n bigger than
equal to B,
PN implies PN plus one.
And then your conclusion
is that for all n bigger than equal to
b, pn is true.
So inductions don't always have to start
at zero. You can pick where you start.
Just make sure that you verify the
starting point and you verify the
implication for all n at that starting
point and beyond.
All
right, let's now
do a false proof using induction.
We're going to prove
that all horses are the same color.
Oops.
So let's go through the process.
So the proof we write down by induction.
Now we need our induction hypothesis the
predicate.
So we're going to let that be
we can't let it be this. Why can't this
be our predicate? All horses are the
same color. What's wrong with making
that be the induction hypothesis?
You can't plug anything into it. There's
no number here. I got to have a number
to an N to induct on. So, what I'm going
to say is that
in any set
of n horses,
and let's make n bigger than equal to
one.
The horses
are all the same color.
All right. Now, if I prove this is true
for all n, well, then all horses are the
same color because in any set of n
horses, they're all the same color. So,
all horses must be the same color.
What's the next thing I do? What's the
next step?
base case.
Now, what am I going to use as my base
case here?
One one horse. Okay. Or n equals one.
So, p of one. That would say that in any
set of one horses, the horses are all
the same color. Well, that's true. I got
one horse. It's the same color as
itself. So, that's easy. It's true
since just one horse.
All right.
All right. What's the next step
of the proof? What's the next thing I
do? Inductive step.
So I've got a I am going to assume
that PN is true
to prove
PN and show PS PN plus one is true.
All right. So I'm going to assume that
in any set of n horses, the horses are
all the same color that I start with.
And now I look at a set of n plus one
horses.
So we consider
a set of n plus1 horses
and let's call those horses h1, h2,
hn plus1.
What do I know about
horses H1 to HN?
They're the same color because PN is
true. They are a set of N horses by P1.
They're all the same color.
All right. Uh, also
what do I know about H2, H3,
and HN plus one?
All the same color because they're a set
of N horses.
All right.
Well,
since H
the color of H1
equals the color of those guys.
H2
to HN. I know H1 is the same color as
these guys. I also know that HN plus one
is the same color as those guys.
That means that H1 is the same color as
HN plus one.
And all n plus one are the same color
and that's PN plus one.
That implies PN plus one
and I'm done.
Now a few years ago we assigned this
problem as homework and we asked
students to figure out what went wrong
as the problem. Why why doesn't this
work? And uh the responses were a little
discouraging.
Half the class responded effectively as
follows. This example just goes to show
that induction doesn't always work.
A third of the class said I always knew
that you can't trust mathematics. this
example just proves it.
That that really hurt, you know, and
most of the rest were something similar
to that. Uh not exactly what we were
looking for in the homework. So now we
we don't leave it to homework. We do it
in class. Um what's the flaw here?
What what is it?
P of N. What's wrong with P of N?
No, that's this is a real assumption. In
any set of n horses
depends on n, the horses are all the
same color. That is a proposition
because it depends on n. It's a
predicate. It's true or it's false.
Now, we know it's false because you
could get a set of couple of horses with
different color, but it is a
proposition. Yeah. Way back there.
P for like a certain set of forces.
Yeah.
So even though it was the same number of
forces was the same number, it was a
different set of forces. So it's not
something you can assume anymore. That's
a great point. I did gloss over
something here because in the predicate
I've got in any set. So there's really a
for all sets sitting out here. So I got
to be careful that I establish that when
I'm trying to prove PN implies PN plus
one. So to establish PN plus one here, I
assume PN, which means in any set of N
horses, they're all the same color that
I'm given. That's PN. I've got to look
at any set of N plus1 horses. So
consider any set, not a set, any set of
N plus1 horses. So you pick any set you
want. Call them this H1 through HN plus
one. Well, then the first n are a set of
n horses, so I can apply PN. Therefore,
they have the same color. The last n
horses in the set are a set of n horses,
so I can apply PN. So, these guys all
have the same color, and I'm on my merry
way here. So, you're right. I had to do
a little bit more work, but I can do
that work, and I still get a proof.
Yeah,
good question. There's a problem with a
base case. So my base case was here n
equals 1
in any set of one horse the horses let's
say in the set just to be really
careful
are all the same color. No in any set of
one horses is only one horse. So it's
the same color as itself. Yeah,
right.
N plus one is not the same as n. Yeah.
That's set. You can't have the same
assumption because it's not um a set of
n horses. It's a set of n plus one.
Well, let's see. So, you're you're
arguing I made a mistake here, right?
Well, I've got horses, horse two, three
up to n plus one. How many horses are in
this set here?
Oh, in that set.
In this set, how many horses are there?
N.
N. So I can apply P of N to this set
just the same as that set because P of N
is any set of N horses. Well, I'm
picking this one now and applying PN to
it. And so therefore, they're all the
same color.
Yeah.
H1, H2, dot dot dot.
Yes,
because it does work if there's two or
more, but you didn't prove it was just
one or one from one to two, I guess.
Exactly. Remember I told you that dot
dot dot. so reasonable, so easy to use,
everybody uses it was going to catch us
up. The bug is in the dot dot dot and in
particular, it's has to do with the case
n equal two. So there's two ways to look
at the bug dot dot dot or we didn't
completely do all the inductive steps.
So let's look at the case actually it's
the case n equals 1
here in this inductive step did I prove
p1 implies p2
let's just double check that worked for
n equals 1
um
n equals 1 I've got a set of
two horses This becomes two. So I've got
H1 H2
there. Nothing in the dot dot dot. It's
just H1 and H2.
Then
this becomes
H1.
So sure enough, H1 is the same color as
itself. This becomes what does this
become? This set of horses. What is it
really? H2.
All right. So, I've got the color of H1
equals the color of
Oh, man. This is so hard to see this
bug. I I I wrote down H2 dot dot dot to
HN because
take out H1.
What's left? It's what's left is H2
through HN. But this set is only H1.
What's really left here? What is this
set?
What is this set?
H2H1. No,
there's you see what is the whole set?
H1 dot dot dot HN. What is the whole
thing? It's just H1.
Pull out H1 and look at the rest of it.
How many horses are are here?
Zero horses.
This is the empty set. There are no
horses here to compare to.
Even though I got a I got an H2, I got
an HN. I got dot dot dot. Because
generally if n's big,
this has n minus one horses are here.
There's n total. I got n minus one right
here.
But n minus one is zero. There are no
horses here. And so this bridge in the
equality totally breaks,
right? I got color of h1 equals
there's no information here equals the
color of h2. There's no equality here.
There's no horses in this set. All
because of that dot dot dot. Do you see
where the problem is by using the dot
dot dot for the case n equals one? It
was true for every other case of n. n=
2, n= 3, it's all true. All right. In
fact, what we proved, we proved the base
case of P1 is true. This is an argument
that P2 implies P3. That is true.
P3
implies P4. That is true. and so forth.
We prove for all n bigger than equal to
two PN implies PN plus one. That we
proved. What is the one missing
implication? We did not prove
the missing link P1 implies P2.
We did not prove that. Now, is that
true?
No. any you can find a set of two horses
that are not the same color and just
because every horse is the same color as
itself does not give you that that was
missing in this proof. And so we have to
be really careful when you're doing
these proofs that you establish the
inductive step for all n bigger than
equal to the base case. And then make
sure if you're going to use this really
convenient dot dot dot notation that you
don't wind up here saying, "Oh, this is
horses H2 through HN when there's no
horses there
because N's one."
Any questions about this? Yeah.
Great question. All right, let's fix the
proof. Start with a base case of P of
two. And now I've got all this done. And
so therefore that's another proof.
Yeah.
Say it again.
The pro this is still the same. In any
set of n bigger than equal to two
horses, all the horses in the set are
the same color. That's what he's saying.
And he's saying, hey, look, the proof
worked here. The inductive step is just
fine. P2 does imply P3. Yeah. base isn't
true. So
that's right. The base case fails.
All right. That's why you've always got
to check the base case.
Yeah.
That is correct. That's a great point.
We have given a proof that if you look
at any pair of horses and they're the
same color, then all horses are the same
color. That's true.
That is true. Of course, there are pairs
of horses that aren't the same color.
So, the base case would fail. So, always
check the base case. You can prove some
great stuff if you don't check the base
case,
right?
All right. Any any other questions about
that? Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, as long as it's an
integer and as long as you prove PN
implies PN plus one starting there all
the way out. Yeah, you can start at
negative numbers if you want. Usually
there's not many cases where that comes
up you want to, but you can. Nothing
wrong with that.
Any other questions?
Yeah, you can see why it was a messy
homework problem.
All right. Uh so far we've seen examples
of how induction is useful in proving
the hypothesis is true but not in
solving the problem per se
or even figuring out what the hypothesis
should be. Now in the last example we're
going to show you how induction can be
used to prove there is a solution to a
problem and also how to find the
solution. So it's actually going to be a
very useful constructive thing in this
case. Now, this problem arose in the
construction of the Stata Center, the
building we're in now. Uh, this whole
building was originally supposed to cost
completely furnished under $und00
million. That was the goal. But the
first mistake they made was the first
step was hiring the architect and they
hired Frank Giri. I think MIT is now in
a lawsuit with Frank Giri. Uh, so he was
the architect and cost just went nuts.
You know, as you can imagine, you know,
all these slanted walls and crazy things
happening actually are expensive. And uh
the cost quickly got over $300 million.
Literally, that that part's true. Now,
I'm going to fabricate a little bit. Uh
now, actually fundraising became a huge
priority once they're more than 200
million over budget and they haven't
even bought the furniture yet. So, some
pretty radical ideas were proposed and
one of them was to build a large 2 to
the n by 2 to the n courtyard and put a
statue of a wealthy potential donor in
the center of the courtyard. So let's
draw this.
So the courtyard
and of course you know it's computer
science so it has to be a power of two.
So, it's 2 the n by 2 to the n.
And I've drawn here the case n= 2.
And we've got to get uh the statue of
the wealthy guy in the middle. And I'm
not supposed to reveal his name. So,
we're just going to call him Bill.
All right. So, Bill's got to go in the
center. Now, this would be fine except
that nothing was easy with Frank Gary.
everything is some weird weird thing
going on. And he insisted on using
L-shaped tiles for the courtyard.
So, the tiles that we're going to use
look like this. So, it's, you know,
almost a 2 by two except you're missing
that piece.
So, what you need to figure out how to
do is tile this courtyard perfectly,
leaving one spot for Bill using tiles
like this. these L-shaped tiles
and this is 2 x two here.
So that's the task. So let's see if we
can do that for n equals 2 here.
Um let's see. We can do a tile here.
We can do a tile here.
a tile here, a tile here, and a tile
there.
So, we can in this case, we can tile the
courtyard perfectly using these L-shaped
tiles, leaving one square in the center
for the statue.
All right, everybody understand what
we're trying to do? The goal? Now, I
want to do it for n.
Uh so let's start proving it by
induction even though we don't know how
to do it yet because we're going to see
how induction is going to help us show
it's possible and maybe even show us how
to do it.
All right. So let's state a theorem
for all n.
There exists a way
to tile
a 2 to the n by 2 to the n
region
or courtyard
with a center square missing for Bill.
And the proof will be by induction.
And our induction hypothesis, the
predicate
PN is going to be what we're trying to
prove.
All right? So this is the induction
hypothesis.
Almost always when you do the induction,
you want to start out with that as your
hypothesis.
What's the next step?
Base case. Never ever forget the base
case
or you'll be thinking all horses are the
same color.
P 0.
Well, the courtyard for N equals 0 is
just one square.
And that's for Bill.
So you're done. There's no tiles at all
to worry about. That's easy. So that's
true.
And then we do the inductive step.
Okay. So,
inductive step
for n bigger than equal to zero. Got to
remember to keep track of that. Now we
assume
PN
to verify the inductive hypothesis or to
prove PN plus one.
A lot of ways to write this down, but
you always want to say what you're
assuming and why.
So we need to show
PN plus one is true.
Well, so let's look at a 2 to the n by 2
the n +1 by 2 the n +1 courtyard.
All right. So let's draw it out here.
2 the n +1 by 2 the n +1
What are we going to do to use our
inductive hypothesis? Yeah.
for them. Yeah. So that you're on a good
track there for sure, but I got to apply
I'm not going from one to two. I want to
get I want to use PN here. So I got a
two to the n plus one by two to the n
plus one courtyard. How do I use PN?
Two to the n by two to the n courtyard.
Yeah.
Oh, never mind. I don't think it works.
I was about to say that would be as if
two to the n would divide that into four
blocks. Good idea. Yeah, let's divide
our courtyard into four blocks. That's a
great idea. And now each of these is 2
to the n by 2 to the n,
right?
And I can apply the inductive hypothesis
there.
Yeah.
Yeah. Something. Yeah. It doesn't quite
work because Bill wants to be here.
Got a little square for Bill there. But
I can't I can't use my inductive
hypothesis to tile this
because there's no square missing. In
fact, even if there wasn't a square
missing, I'm in trouble. If I've got say
this is size 16, 4x4 here, can I tile a
4x4 region with L-shaped tiles?
No, they're size three. Three doesn't
divide 16. Yeah,
there's a great idea. All right, we're
we're making progress now. Take a corner
out of each of them. Put my L-shaped
tile here.
Now I can use the inductive hypothesis
to tile each one of these.
Yeah.
Why can't you put like a a four in the
center and then you have a bunch of twos
on the side?
Four in the center and a bunch.
A two by two in the center.
I got that. I got bill and a tile
and then but like make it bigger. Not
just like four single tiles, but like
you have So you have something like that
over there, right? Put that in the
center.
Put that in the center. Okay. The rest
of them will have like 2 by two which
you know
well the rest of them aren't 2 by two
because this is n I got to use PN here
and PN says that I can in a region 2 to
the n by two to the n with a square out
of the center I can tile it.
Did I make am I good here so far? Did I
claimed I was sort of done? Yeah. What?
No, because P of N tells us well P of N
tells us that we can set up a 2 by 2
piece.
Yeah.
Yeah. And what's the problem for this 2
to the N by two to the N region?
Bill's not in the center. He wants to be
in the center. We put Bill in the
corner. So, you can't use the inductive
hypothesis here.
Ah, so I I went a little too fast here.
That's This is not a proof so far. I got
a problem. Yeah.
Great. Okay. Let's then change the
inductive hypothesis.
Good. Let's say there exists a way to
tile a two to the n by two to the n
region with a corner square missing
for bill.
All right.
Oh, but I got to put Oh, but I can make
this work. Yeah. Yeah, we can make some
we can prove this. Now, the inductive
step's going to work because I'll put
Bill say he's in one of the four
regions. Then use the L down here.
Put the L here. And now I've got a
corner out of each one. And now I'm done
by induction.
I have proved there's a way to tile any
two to the n by two to the n region with
a corner square missing.
I think that proof works. Yeah.
Bill in the middle because you prove
that you can put in the corner. 2x2 case
you can just blow that square up and
that square where Bill was becomes just
another square which is 4x4 and then you
can put them in the middle. That is
true. So you jumped ahead. Uh we have
successfully now proved this is true for
P of N but Bill didn't want to be in the
corner. We're trying to prove there's a
way to do it with Bill in the center
which is not what we proved. And you
come up with a way yeah that might be
doable. First prove you can put Bill in
the corner and
do it in two to the n by two to the n's.
Oh, I don't know about this actually.
I got bill in the corner. There's some
way to do it, but it might have involved
doing this. And now I can't rotate that.
I don't think we have I don't think that
proof necessarily works.
that he could be here. But likewise, we
could prove that if the block just
rotates, you can
Yes, I agree with you. And I like it
when I first heard it, and you might
still convince me, but all we've proved
is is this. There's a two to the n by
two to the n any two to the n by two to
the n region. We can tile it with a
corner bill in a corner. Any corner
square missing.
Good. So now you want to say I can get
Bill in the middle. And what you want to
say is okay, I tile this region with
Bill here, you know, two to the n by
maybe you're right. So then I would
apply the I'd apply the theorem here
with Bill here. Oh, Bill here. No, I
think I like it now. There. And then I
would take these out.
three blocks
and
that big square is just like a zoom a
zoomed out version of like the little
square.
I like that.
You know that little square fits in like
a 2 by two like for example in the
um in the four uh 4x4 case in the like
we proved the 2 by two case in the 4x4
case you have and you have like a big
size. It's just like a you have four
squares, right? And each of the each of
those four squares has four squares.
So you take that right top right square
and you put fill within
the smaller square
where exactly where you want them to be
and then you fill those other like all
those empty spaces with
I agree you can make a proof and so in
this case you'd make a lema that uses
induction that says you can do it with
Bill in the corner and then as a
correlary or a theorem you'd take that
and apply it to four sub squares, put
Bill in here, take these out, and then
now you have your result with Bill in
the center. So that is a way to do it.
It ends up being more complicated. There
is a simpler approach, but that is that
is a way that works and is a natural
thing you would do if you had this on
homework is you'd think of a different
thing to prove by induction, then use
that as a lema to get you where you
wanted to go. There's another way to do
it without having that first step.
All right? And that's Yeah.
that courtyard.
Divide each cell into a 2 by two.
Yeah.
Well, yeah. Yeah.
Or you want to do it bottoms up. You
want to take it and divide and that make
that your your inductive step by two by
twos inside. I haven't thought about
that approach.
If you do that,
then you're all set except for the 2 by
two where
I'm worried about a lot of 2 by twos
with a corner missing if I do it that
way. Think about that. Um there is let
me get to a
uh another approach here.
We couldn't make it work with the
center. We could make it work with a
corner but then we had to do more work
after.
One general technique to use with
induction when you're having struggling
what's the induction hypothesis to use.
If what you got doesn't work you could
pick a different one but better to pick
a stronger one. Yeah.
Yes, you could, and that is a good thing
to do. Make the induction hypothesis be
much stronger.
I had trouble proving there's a way to
do it with a center square missing.
Turns out to be easier to prove it where
you assume any square could be missing.
Seems like this should be harder, right?
We had a hard enough time just showing
this square missing was doable. But by
assuming something by trying to prove a
harder problem assuming something
stronger in PN it gets easier to prove.
All right. Now we better check the base
case
P 0. But that's easy. There's only one
square bill can be.
All right. But now let's look at PN
implies PN plus one.
All right. So we go back to this. We've
got a 2 to the n plus1 by 2 to the n
plus1 courtyard.
And now Bill can be anywhere.
Put him here. There's Bill.
Now I'm going to place my first L-shaped
tile here in the other three regions.
And now I apply PN to each region.
Well, PN says I can do it with any
square missing. So I'll pick this one
out here, this one out here, that one
there, and that one there. And now I'm
done. And that was easy.
No extra steps.
Now, how is it possible that it was
easier to prove something that was
harder?
Yeah.
By being in the center of the
constraint.
Yes, that is true. But but by allowing
him to be anywhere, I could have
started. I have to that's a possibility.
See what I'm trying to do here. This
inductive step is all about proving PN
implies PN plus one is true.
That's what I'm trying to show.
Now, how is it useful for me if PN is
stronger has more
you grow it? You prove that it can be in
say the corner. Well, but when you grow
it, the corner moves. But since we
proved that it can be in any, it's fine
if it moves.
Exactly. That's exactly right.
PN got more powerful
which means I get more to assume here in
the recursive problem. Bill can be
anywhere now. Gives me more power. I can
tile any courtyard with a a courtyard
with any square missing. This is more
powerful. So this got more powerful. So
did this. So what it means is my tool
set is bigger with a stronger PN. And
what I'm trying to construct or prove
got harder. And sometimes
if I've got more tools, it becomes
easier to prove even a harder thing. And
so a general rule with induction is if
it you don't first succeed, try try
again. Well, the rule with induction is
if you don't succeed at first, try
something harder.
All right? And it's amazing, but it
actually works a lot of the time, as it
did here. If I don't assume something
strong enough and pee in some little
weak thing like Bill just in the in the
center, it's not enough to go anywhere.
But if I can assume a lot more like Bill
can be anywhere he pleases,
then I can prove lots of things here.
All right? So you see, so it's all the
art, and you're going to learn this over
the next several weeks. It's all the art
of what's your induction hypothesis.
Picking a good one, life is easy.
picking up the wrong one. Very painful
as you'll see with beaver flu.
Okay, that's it for today.